Add WITH RECURSIVE documentation (#5163)
prestosql/presto: presto-docs/src/main/sphinx/sql/select.rst

    relation is used. This means that if the relation is used more than once and the query
    is non-deterministic, the results may be different each time.

WITH RECURSIVE Clause
---------------------

The ``WITH RECURSIVE`` clause is a variant of the ``WITH`` clause. It defines a
``UNION`` of two relations. The first relation is called the *recursion base*,

> and the second relation is called the *recursion step*:

Reviewer: It is not correct to say that `WITH RECURSIVE` clause defines a union of relations.

After the words `WITH RECURSIVE`, there comes a _list_ of queries. Each of those queries is _potentially recursive_. Some might be actually recursive, some might be not. Each of those queries which are actually recursive, defines a union of two relations.

We know that a query in the list is actually recursive when it meets certain conditions, roughly speaking:
- it is shaped as union,
- it has a recursive reference to its own name.

Author: Updated .. please verify

.. code-block:: none

    WITH RECURSIVE T(n) AS (
    <recursion base relation>
    UNION (ALL | DISTINCT)
    <recursion step relation: SELECT .. FROM ... T...>
    )

>     ... SELECT ... FROM T

Reviewer: Following what I said before, this is not a full form of `WITH RECURSIVE` clause. I think it should be mentioned. This is the simplest and, probably, the most common form - it only has a single query in the list.

Also, please clean up the multiple dots and surrounding spaces in this code block.

Author: I am not sure how you want this cleaned up. Also could we actually make it an example that replaces <recursion base relation> ..

  obtained
- union the base and all the steps, and return it as the result

The types of the returned columns are those of the base relation. Therefore it
is required that types in the step relation can be coerced to base relation
types.

The ``RECURSIVE`` clause applies to all queries in the ``WITH`` list, but not
all of them must be recursive. If a ``WITH``-query is not shaped according to
the rules mentioned above or it does not contain a recursive reference, it is
processed like a regular ``WITH``-query. Column aliases are mandatory for all
the queries in the recursive ``WITH`` list.

The following limitations apply as a result of following the SQL standard and
due to implementation choices, in addition to ``WITH`` clause limitations:

- only single-element recursive cycles are supported. Like in regular
  ``WITH``-queries, references to previous queries in the ``WITH`` list are
  allowed. References to following queries are forbidden.
- usage of outer joins, set operations, limit clause, and others is not always
  allowed in the step relation
- recursion depth is fixed, defaults to ``1``, and doesn't depend on the actual

>   query results

Reviewer: It defaults to `10` if I recall correctly.

Author: fixed

> You can adjusted by the recursion depth with the session property

Reviewer: typo?

Author: fixed

``max_recursion_depth``. When changing the value consider that the size of the

> query plan grows is quadratic with recursion depth.

Reviewer: typo?

Author: fixed

    relation is used. This means that if the relation is used more than once and the query
    is non-deterministic, the results may be different each time.

WITH RECURSIVE Clause
---------------------

The ``WITH RECURSIVE`` clause is a variant of the ``WITH`` clause. It can

> process a list of queries, including recursive processing.

Author: Done

.. warning::

    This feature is experimental only. Proceed to use it only if you understand
    potential query failures and the impact of the recursion processing on your
    workload.

The recursive queries are detected automatically on the following criteria:

- It defines a ``UNION`` of two relations. The first relation is called the
  *recursion base*, and the second relation is called the *recursion step*.

> - Tt has a recursive reference to its own name.

Author: fixed

The following listing shows a simple example, that displays a commonly used
form of only one query in the list:

.. code-block:: none

    WITH RECURSIVE T(n) AS (
    <recursion base relation>
    UNION (ALL | DISTINCT)
    <recursion step relation: SELECT  FROM ... T...>
    )

>     ... SELECT ... FROM T

Author: Done

Presto supports recursive ``WITH``-queries with a single recursive reference to
a ``WITH``-query from within the query. The name ``T`` of the query ``T`` can be

> mentioned once in the ``FROM`` clause of the recursion step relation.

Author: I move it above and left the generic code as well for now.

    relation is used. This means that if the relation is used more than once and the query
    is non-deterministic, the results may be different each time.

WITH RECURSIVE Clause
---------------------

> The ``WITH RECURSIVE`` clause is a variant of the ``WITH`` clause. It can define
> a list of queries to process, including recursive processing of suitable
> queries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``WITH RECURSIVE`` clause is a variant of the ``WITH`` clause. It defines
a list of named queries, possibly including recursive queries.
```

Author: That is too succinct imho .. I changed a bit, but left the process and recursive processing

Reviewer: The fact is that the queries in the list are not "queries to process". They are just _predefined_ named queries that can be used in the main query. They are processed on demand only. That is why I opposed to using the word "process".

Author: Thats getting really into lower level naming .. the fact that they are parsed and evaluated is something I already consider part of processing. I think you mean processing only means when actual data is processed ... so later in the execution. My main concern really is that we say "recursive queries" which is not as explicit. Nothing about the written down query is recursive .. it only becomes a recursion when it is processed.  Anyway .. I suggest we leave it as it is.

.. warning::

    This feature is experimental only. Proceed to use it only if you understand
    potential query failures and the impact of the recursion processing on your
    workload.

.. code-block:: none

   WITH RECURSIVE T(n) AS (
    <recursion base relation>
    UNION (ALL | DISTINCT)
    <recursion step relation: SELECT  FROM ... T...>
    )

>     ... SELECT ... FROM T

Reviewer: I think we don't need this generic example. The other example + explanation is enough.

Author: ok .. removed

A recursive ``WITH``-query must be shaped as a ``UNON`` of two relations. The
first relation is called the *recursion base*, and the second relation is called
the *recursion step*. Presto supports recursive ``WITH``-queries with a single
recursive reference to a ``WITH``-query from within the query. The name ``T`` of
the query ``T`` can be mentioned once in the ``FROM`` clause of the recursion
step relation.

The following listing shows a simple example, that displays a commonly used

> form of only one query in the list:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
form of single query in the list:
```

Author: add `a single query` to be correct

.. code-block:: none

    WITH RECURSIVE t(n) AS (
        VALUES (1)
        UNION ALL

>         SELECT n+1 FROM t WHERE n < 4

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        SELECT n + 1 FROM t WHERE n < 4
```

Author: fixed

    )
    SELECT sum(n) FROM t;

In the preceding query the simple assignment ``VALUES (1)`` defines the

> recursion base relation. ``SELECT n+1 FROM t WHERE n < 4`` defines the recursion

Reviewer: ```suggestion
recursion base relation. ``SELECT n +  FROM t WHERE n < 4`` defines the recursion
```

Author: added spaces without removing 1

> step relation. The recursion processing performs these steps:

Reviewer: This list lacks "step 0" which is computing the recursion base (`1`).
Maybe add this in the beginning of the list:
```
- recursion base yields ``1``
```

Author: added

- first recursion yields ``1 + 1 = 2``
- second recursion uses the result from the first and adds one: ``2 + 1 = 3``

> - third recursion users the result from the second and adds one again:

Reviewer: Typo in word `uses`

  ``3 + 1 = 4``
- fourth recursion aborts since ``n = 4``

> - this results in ``t`` having values ``2``, ``3`` and ``4``

Reviewer: ``t`` also has the result of the recursion base (`1`). Without it, the resulting sum is wrong.

Author: oops... totally forgot about that..

- the final statement performs the sum operation of these elements with the

>   final result value ``10``

Reviewer: To simplify the example, I suggest that we do just `SELECT * FROM t` in the final line instead of `sum(n)`.
That would clearly show that the resulting table consists of all the intermediate results including the recursion base. It should have one column with rows `1`, `2`, `3`, `4`.

Author: Then we loose the syntax that exposes the n outside as well. Its simple enough to understand now, yet more powerful for users. I will leave it as it stands.

Logically, the recursive query processing is a sequence of actions:

- compute the recursion base
- compute the recursion step using the precomputed base where the relation name
  is mentioned
- compute the next step using the previous step
- repeat until the recursion converges, which means an empty relation is
  obtained

> - union the base and all the steps, and return it as the result

Reviewer: I don't think we need this additional explanation. This is all explained in the example above.

Author: Ok.. I thought it is helpful.. but the section is getting long .. so I am turfing it.
